Okay, just one more on the devil and a force, maybe two more. I take it you do
have an interest in the Middle Ages then? Oh, certainly. I think that it's very
hard for me to imagine a thinking person who would not have an interest in the
Middle Ages. It would be like not having an interest in ancient Greece or in the
Roman Empire. These are things that had an enormous influence and whose
influence is still felt. The Middle Ages is essentially an active participant in
the life that we live today in the 20th century.
Okay, as I was going through that book, and you
had the protagonist stand on that barrow and so forth. Then he had that dream.
It seemed to be that the barrow man or the creature in there was waking. And you
never carried that forward. I kept thinking that he would be an actual character
in the story and come forth and do something. Why didn't you ever make him real?
Why did he appear just in the dream? Well, he is real. He's not tangible. He is
an influence on the actions of the other people and particularly on Mother Kloot
and Watt.
Okay. Has that book sold very well, do you know? I don't think it did terribly
well in hardcover. It seems to be doing quite well in paperback. Okay. Okay, my
last area here really is the Islands of Dr. Death material.
Okay, in the Islands of Dr. Death and other stories, you used what I think is,
as an English teacher to me, a very unique point of view, which was a second
-person narrator. And I wondered why you chose that one. I think largely as an
experiment, I wanted to see if it could be done. I needed a way of, or I felt I
needed a very distinct way of setting off the material in the book, The Island
of Dr. Death, which is the book that the boy Tacky is reading in the story. from
Tacky's own story. And that was the strongest way of contrasting the two
elements that I could come up with. I needed the very strong contrast in order
to get the shock effect when the characters from the book that Tacky was reading
actually appeared in his own life, Captain Ransom and Dr. Death himself and so
forth.
Neither world, I thought, the real world that Tacky lives in or the fictional
one he's reading about, I didn't think either one of them were particularly
attractive, and I wondered if a reader was supposed to choose between them. No,
what I was trying to say, I think, was that the kind of literature that people
tend, perhaps, to criticize children for having and reading is actually
healthier and more straightforward in most cases than the world in which the
children are actually living. So I took this, the island with the monster race
on it, the ancient monster race, and the mad scientists and so forth, and
contrasted that with Tacky's actual life experience with his mother and the
mother's boyfriend and the party and so forth. Okay, good. I know that I sort of
know the answer to this question a little bit. I've read some other statements
of yours on this, but I still want to ask it. The reason you wrote the second
and third stories, The Death of Dr. Island and The Doctor of Death Island. Well,
the reason that I wrote the...
I get to mix it up myself. Well, The Death of Dr. Island was simply that I was
talking to Joe Hensley and The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories and Other
Stories had lost... Pardon me, The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories had
lost the nebula, and it had lost to no award. It's the only history in the
history of science fiction writers of America to lose that award to no award.
Joe Hensley said, You should write one called The Death of Dr. Island, and that
would win for sure. And he said it as a joke, of course. And I thought, Well, he
thinks I can't do it, but I can do it. So I started thinking about what kind of
a story would go with that title, who Dr. Island might be, and what the death of
Dr. Island might be, and so forth, and came up with that story. And then The
Doctor of Death Island? Well, I wanted to see if I could do it again. People
kept coming up to me and giving me various switches on that title, because the
business with the titles got a number of people's fancy. And so I thought, Well,
I'll try it again and see if I could do it a third time. And I could, but it was
sufficiently difficult that I didn't get terribly interested in trying to do it
a fourth time. Okay, I'm sort of winding down. Now, David here is frantic for me
to ask you this question. I've sort of asked it off and on during the interview,
and he just wants me to try it another way. Again, about your style. Are you
conscious of your style? To me, from what I've read in science fiction, I
suppose every writer has his own unique style. And I respond to that very much
as an English teacher. But I still think that you are one of the most unique of
all. And I wonder if you're conscious of yourself as having a very distinct
style. I don't think that I have the same style in all my work. I think that
what I try to do, at least, is to write in the style that is appropriate to the
story that I have to tell. And if there's also a personal style that comes
through and is found in all stories, then I'm not really conscious of that.
Okay, for instance, say contrasting the fifth head of Cerberus with the Book of
the New Sun. The Book of the New Sun is tremendously visual. And I didn't think
the fifth head of Cerberus was. Is that a development in your style or a
conscious choice on your part? No, I suppose it's a development. I wasn't trying
to be not visual in the fifth head of Cerberus. I generally try to be visual.
Maybe I've gotten a little bit better at it. Okay. I ran across a reference. I'm
sorry to say I couldn't get a hold of any more information on it. But I ran
across a reference that you won an award for verse in 1978. And I
wondered if you could tell me about that and how much poetry you write. I don't
write much lately. I won the Reisling Award, which is given by the Science
Fiction Poetry Association, for a poem called The Computer Iterates the Greater
Trumps. It's about, well, it's about, you know what computer iteration is. And
the computer is going through what is also called the Major Arcana in a tarot
deck.
Okay. Have you ever had, do you have enough verse that it might ever be put
together in a volume and published? Oh, I suppose it's possible. There should be
about that amount around, but I don't see it happening within the next few
years. Yeah, the reason I ask is, we talked to Ray Bradbury recently, and he's
just come out with the volume of his verse, which we enjoyed very much. And I
see a, I don't know, more science fiction poetry, more science fiction writers
writing it these days. Okay. I guess the last, very last question I would think
of, and you mentioned this earlier, besides the coda to the Book of the New Sun,
what other work are you doing now or do you plan? Well, I have nothing planned,
actually, that isn't underway. I've got so much underway that I'm not anxious to
come across any more plans. I have a book called Free Live Free that I'm working
on, which is completely unrelated. It's a novel laid in the present day. I have
a couple of short stories that I'm working on. Is that novel going to be a
mainstream one? No, I would say it's a science fiction or fantasy novel. It
depends on which way you want to classify it. One of the characters is a witch.
Okay.
Okay, listen, there's so much more we could talk about. You know, you've written
so many short stories and so forth, but we've really taken enough of your time,
and this is going to make an excellent interview as it is, so I think we better
let you go back to your work or your thinking, whatever. Is there anything,
though, else you might want to say or get on the air that you'd like to get out
of, you know, to say? I really can't think of anything that we haven't already
covered. I might mention for people who've heard this that if they're interested
in the book of the new sun, they should start with the first volume, which is
The Shadow of the Torture, which I don't think we've talked about much, but that
would about do it. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah, I would assume anybody interested would
start with the first volume, but... Okay, listen, Mr. Wolfe, I appreciate this
very much. What we will do, we have about a... well, maybe six weeks lead time
between the interview and the time it goes on the air, so we will send you
copies of the interviews. Probably there will be about a... our show airs every
day for five minutes, and I assume with the length of this interview we're going
to get at least maybe even two weeks out of it. That's what we do with a lengthy
interview like this is to, you know, five-minute segments and go for a couple
weeks, so we'll send you a cassette of all those shows when they're edited.
They're terrific. Thank you very much. And we appreciate your time very much,
and we'll be looking forward to your future work. I'll be looking forward to
your cassette. Okay, thank you very much, sir. Thank you. Goodbye.